.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Eric Sanchis (eric.sanchis@iut-rodez.fr)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"
.TH STRSNTCAT 3S  2022-08-18 "GNU" "-"
.SH NAME
strsntcat, strstcat - size-bounded sub-string concatenation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include \N'34'strtnt.h\N'34' 
.PP
.BI "int strsntcat(char *" dst ", size_t " dstsize ", const char *" src ", size_t " nb );
.PP
.BI "int strstcat(char *" dst ", size_t " dstsize ", const char *" src ", size_t " nb );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR strsntcat()
and
.BR strstcat()
functions append up to the first (not null) nb characters from the source string pointed to by
.IR src 
to the destination array  pointed to by
.IR dst ,
overwriting its terminating null byte (\(aq\\0\(aq). Then, a new null byte is appended to the new string. The full size of the destination buffer
.IR dst 
is
.IR dstsize .
.PP
The
.BR strstcat()
function specifies that truncation is allowed. When truncation is not allowed, the
.BR strsntcat()
function should be used.
.PP
Let
.I dstlen
the length of the string pointed to by
.IR dst ,
.I srclen
the length of the string pointed to by
.IR src
and
.I m 
= min(
.I srclen 
,
.I nb 
).
If
.I dstlen
+
.I m
is less than 
.IR dstsize ,
the
.BR strsntcat()
and
.BR strstcat()
functions only append 
.I m
characters to 
.IR src
and an additionnal null byte to 
.IR dst . 
They do not pad the remainder of 
.IR dst 
with null bytes.
.PP
When 
.I dstlen
+
.I m
>=
.IR dstsize ,
the 
.BR strsntcat()
function returns the error code ETRUNC and the destination buffer
.IR dst
remains unchanged. The
.BR strstcat() 
function appends
.IR dstsize
-
.I dstlen
- 1 characters and a terminating null byte. The return value is OTRUNC.
.PP 
The 
.BR strsntcat() 
and 
.BR strstcat() 
functions store a well-formed string (i.e. a string with a terminating null byte) into the buffer pointed to by 
.IR dst 
or leave this buffer unchanged.
.PP
The destination buffer pointed to by
.IR dst 
remains unchanged if one of these conditions is realized:
.IP * 2
.IR dst
is a NULL pointer or the buffer pointed to by
.IR dst
contains a bad-formed string (i.e. a string without a terminating null byte).
.IP * 2
.IR dstsize 
is equal to 0.
.IP * 2 
.IR  src 
is a NULL pointer.
.IP * 2 
.I m
is equal to 0.
.IP * 2 
The 
.BR strsntcat() 
function is used and 
.I dstlen
+
.I m
>=
.IR dstsize .
.PP
The behavior of the 
.BR strsntcat() 
and 
.BR strstcat() 
functions is undefined if:
.IP * 2
.IR dst 
and 
.IR src 
overlap.
.IP * 2 
.IR dstsize 
is different to 0 and does not correspond to the actual size of the destination buffer pointed to by 
.IR dst .
.IP * 2 
.IR src 
is a bad-formed string.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions return:
.IP * 2
A non negative integer after success:
.TP
.in +4
.B ONOTRUNC
.in +6
No truncation was done during the concatenation: 
.BR strstcat() , 
.BR strsntcat() .
.TP
.in +4 
.B OTRUNC
.in +6
An allowed truncation was done during the concatenation: 
.BR strstcat() .
.IP * 2
A negative integer after error:
.TP
.in +4
.B EDSTNUL
.in +6
.IR dst
is a NULL pointer: 
.BR strstcat() ,
.BR strsntcat() .
.TP
.in +4
.B EDSTSZ0
.in +6
.IR dstsize
is equal to 0: 
.BR strstcat() , 
.BR strsntcat() .
.TP
.in +4
.B EDSTBF
.in +6
.IR dst
is a bad-formed string:
.BR strstcat() ,
.BR strsntcat() .
.TP
.in +4
.B ESRCNUL 
.in +6
.IR src 
is a NULL pointer: 
.BR strstcat() , 
.BR strsntcat() .
.TP
.in +4
.B ETRUNC
.in +6 
The remaining space is too small and truncation is not allowed:
.BR strsntcat() .
.SH PORTABILITY
The
.BR strsntcat()
and
.BR strstcat()
functions conform to C89.
.SH NOTES
These functions are designed to replace the
.BR strncat()
and 
.BR strncat_s() 
functions. They are easier to use, more robust, more consistent and less error prone.
.PP
.in +4
.nf
  char randomId[10] = "XXX-";
  int r ;

  /* Truncation is allowed */
  if ( (r = strstcat(randomId,sizeof(randomId),src,n)) < 0 )
     /* error processing */
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Eric Sanchis (eric.sanchis@netc.fr)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2022 Eric Sanchis.
.P
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, to the extent permitted by law. 
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR strntcat() ,
.BR strtcat() .

